source/class_schedule/session_1_06.rst, before:

.. _session_1_06:

Session 6
=========

.. rst-class:: left

  Finish up the exercises

  Write a complete set of unit tests for your mailroom program.

   * You will likely find that it is really hard to test without refactoring.

   * This is Good!

   * If code is hard to test -- it probably should be refactored.

Material to review for next week
--------------------------------

Next week, we'll get started on Object Oriented Methods. It's a good idea to read up on it first -- so we can dive right in:

 * Dive into Python3: 7.2 -- 7.3
   http://www.diveintopython3.net/iterators.html#defining-classes

 * Think Python: 15 -- 18
   http://www.greenteapress.com/thinkpython/html/thinkpython016.html

 * LPTHW: 40 -- 44
   http://learnpythonthehardway.org/book/ex40.html

[note that in py3 you don't need to inherit from object]

Talk by Raymond Hettinger:

Video of talk: https://youtu.be/HTLu2DFOdTg

Slides: https://speakerdeck.com/pyconslides/pythons-class-development-toolkit-by-raymond-hettinger

Commit message:

added a few modules for the intro stuff: sequences, iteration, etc...

source/class_schedule/session_1_06.rst, after:

.. _session_1_06:

#########################
Intro to Python Session 6
#########################

Pre-class prep
==============

In-class Activities
===================


Post-class Activities
=====================

Finish the exercises

Look at the next session for reading, etc:

:ref:`session_1_07`

  Write a complete set of unit tests for your mailroom program.

   * You will likely find that it is really hard to test without refactoring.

   * This is Good!

   * If code is hard to test -- it probably should be refactored.

Material to review for next week
--------------------------------

Next week, we'll get started on Object Oriented Methods. It's a good idea to read up on it first -- so we can dive right in:

 * Dive into Python3: 7.2 -- 7.3
   http://www.diveintopython3.net/iterators.html#defining-classes

 * Think Python: 15 -- 18
   http://www.greenteapress.com/thinkpython/html/thinkpython016.html

 * LPTHW: 40 -- 44
   http://learnpythonthehardway.org/book/ex40.html

[note that in py3 you don't need to inherit from object]

Talk by Raymond Hettinger:

Video of talk: https://youtu.be/HTLu2DFOdTg

Slides: https://speakerdeck.com/pyconslides/pythons-class-development-toolkit-by-raymond-hettinger
