source/class_schedule/session_1_07.rst, before:

.. _session_1_07:

#########################
Intro to Python Session 7
#########################

Pre-class prep
==============

read: :ref:`object_orientation_overview`

read: :ref:`python_classes`

Supplemental reading
--------------------

* Dive into Python3: 7.2 -- 7.3
   http://www.diveintopython3.net/iterators.html#defining-classes

* Think Python: 15 -- 18
   http://www.greenteapress.com/thinkpython/html/thinkpython016.html

Some Videos to watch:
---------------------

Python Class Toolkit by *Raymond Hettinger*

https://youtu.be/HTLu2DFOdTg

https://speakerdeck.com/pyconslides/pythons-class-development-toolkit-by-raymond-hettinger


The Art of Subclassing by *Raymond Hettinger*

http://pyvideo.org/video/879/the-art-of-subclassing

The most salient points from that video are as follows:

* **Subclassing is not for Specialization**

* **Classes and subclassing are for code re-use -- not creating taxonomies**

* **Bear in mind that the subclass is in charge**


Note that the previous talk and this one were back to back at PyCon -- but despite their contradictory titles -- they have similar messages.


Stop Writing Classes
....................

by *Jack Diederich*

http://pyvideo.org/video/880/stop-writing-classes

"If your class has only two methods -- and one of them is ``__init__``
-- you don't need a class"

Material to review for next week
--------------------------------


Talk by Raymond Hettinger:

Video of talk: https://youtu.be/HTLu2DFOdTg

Slides: https://speakerdeck.com/pyconslides/pythons-class-development-toolkit-by-raymond-hettinger


In-class Activities
===================

Exercises:
----------


Post-class Activities
=====================

Finish the exercises

Look at the next session for reading, etc:

:ref:`session_1_08`

Commit message:

updated teh schedule for the class for teh next few weeks

source/class_schedule/session_1_07.rst, after:

.. _session_1_07:

#########################
Intro to Python Session 7
#########################

Pre-class prep
==============

**Read:**

* :ref:`object_orientation_overview`

* :ref:`python_classes`

* :ref:`subclassing_inheritance`


Supplemental reading
--------------------

* Dive into Python3: 7.2 -- 7.3
   http://www.diveintopython3.net/iterators.html#defining-classes

* Think Python: 15 -- 18
   http://www.greenteapress.com/thinkpython/html/thinkpython016.html

Some Videos to watch:
---------------------

Python Class Toolkit by *Raymond Hettinger*

https://youtu.be/HTLu2DFOdTg

https://speakerdeck.com/pyconslides/pythons-class-development-toolkit-by-raymond-hettinger


The Art of Subclassing by *Raymond Hettinger*

http://pyvideo.org/video/879/the-art-of-subclassing

The most salient points from that video are as follows:

* **Subclassing is not for Specialization**

* **Classes and subclassing are for code re-use -- not creating taxonomies**

* **Bear in mind that the subclass is in charge**


Note that the previous talk and this one were back to back at PyCon -- but despite their contradictory titles -- they have similar messages.


Stop Writing Classes
....................

by *Jack Diederich*

http://pyvideo.org/video/880/stop-writing-classes

"If your class has only two methods -- and one of them is ``__init__``
-- you don't need a class"


In-class Activities
===================

review mailman with testing

Exercises:
----------

OO and classes are a big confusing topic when you are new to it.

So we're going to learn hands-on by doing this exercise:

:ref:`exercise_html_renderer`


Post-class Activities
=====================

Finish the HTML render Excercsie through step

Look at the next session for reading, etc:

:ref:`session_1_08`
