source/class_schedule/session_1_05.rst, before:

.. _session_1_05:

Session 5
=========

Catch up!
---------

* Finish the LABs from today
  - Exceptions lab

* Catch up from last week.

  - Add Exception handling to mailroom
  - And list (and dict, and set) comprehensions...

* If you've done all that -- check out the collections module:

  - https://docs.python.org/3.5/library/collections.html
  - here's a good overview: https://pymotw.com/3/collections/

Material to review before next week
-----------------------------------

**Unit Testing:**

* Dive into Python: chapter 9:
  http://www.diveintopython3.net/unit-testing.html

NOTE: you will find that most introductions to unit testing with Python use the builtin ``unitest`` module. However, it is a bit heavyweight, and requires some knowledge of OOP -- classes, etc. So we'll be using pytest in this class: http://doc.pytest.org/en/latest/. But the principles of testing are the same.

* Ned Batchelder's intro to testing presentation:

  - http://nedbatchelder.com/text/test0.html

** Advanced Argument Passing

* arguments and parameters:

  - http://stupidpythonideas.blogspot.com/2013/08/arguments-and-parameters.html

  - https://pythontips.com/2013/08/04/args-and-kwargs-in-python-explained/

Commit message:

added a few modules for the intro stuff: sequences, iteration, etc...

source/class_schedule/session_1_05.rst, after:

.. _session_1_05:

#########################
Intro to Python Session 5
#########################

Pre-class prep
==============

In-class Activities
===================


Post-class Activities
=====================

Finish the exercises

Look at the next session for reading, etc:

:ref:`session_1_05`


* Finish the LABs from today
  - Exceptions lab

* Catch up from last week.

  - Add Exception handling to mailroom
  - And list (and dict, and set) comprehensions...

* If you've done all that -- check out the collections module:

  - https://docs.python.org/3.5/library/collections.html
  - here's a good overview: https://pymotw.com/3/collections/

Material to review before next week
-----------------------------------

**Unit Testing:**

* Dive into Python: chapter 9:
  http://www.diveintopython3.net/unit-testing.html

NOTE: you will find that most introductions to unit testing with Python use the builtin ``unitest`` module. However, it is a bit heavyweight, and requires some knowledge of OOP -- classes, etc. So we'll be using pytest in this class: http://doc.pytest.org/en/latest/. But the principles of testing are the same.

* Ned Batchelder's intro to testing presentation:

  - http://nedbatchelder.com/text/test0.html

** Advanced Argument Passing

* arguments and parameters:

  - http://stupidpythonideas.blogspot.com/2013/08/arguments-and-parameters.html

  - https://pythontips.com/2013/08/04/args-and-kwargs-in-python-explained/
