source/modules/Class_introduction.rst, before:

.. _class_introduction:

#############
Introductions
#############

In which you are introduced to this class, your instructors, your environment and your new best friend, Python.


.. image:: /_static/python.png
    :align: center
    :width: 38%


`xkcd.com/353`_

.. _xkcd.com/353: http://xkcd.com/353


Who are we?
-----------


Who are you?
------------


  Tell us a tiny bit about yourself:

* name
* programming background: what languages have you used?
* neighbor's name
* neighbor's favorite coffee shop or bar


Introduction to This Class
==========================


  Introduction to Python

Link to the syllabus, schedule, supplemental materials and other resources:

https://uwpce-pythoncert.github.io/IntroPython-2017/

Class Structure
---------------

We will be using a variation of a
`"flipped classroom" <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flipped_classroom>`_
for this program.

This means that the "homework" will be reading, watching videos, etc.

And class time will spent primarly coding:

 * Still some lecture -- as little as possible
 * Lots of demos
 * Working on Coding Exercises:
   - On your own, with us to help
   - In small groups
   - Instructor led.

Interrupt with questions -- please!

(Some of the best learning prompted by questions)

Homework:
---------

* Homework will primarily be reading, and the occasional Video

* Exercises will be started in class -- but you can finish them at home.

* You are adults -- it's up to you to do it

* You can do a gitHub "pull request" if you want us to review your work.

    - We'll show you how to do that today.

Communication
-------------

**Mailing list:**

We've set up a Google Group for this class:

programming-in-python@googlegroups.com

We will be using this list to communicate with you. You should have (or will soon) received an email invitation to join the mailing list.

Slack: We have set up a slack channel for discussions. Anything python related is fair game.

https://python2017-fall.slack.com/

We highly encourage you to work together. You will learn at a much deeper level if you work together, and it gets you ready to collaborate with colleagues. If you have never used slack before, you may want to look at their intro:

https://get.slack.help/hc/en-us/articles/115004071768

Office Hours
------------

We will generally will hold "office hours" at a coffee shop for a couple hours
each weekend.

Please feel free to attend even if you do not have a specific question. It is an opportunity to work with the instructors and fellow students, and learn from each other.

What are good times for you?

And what locations?

Commit message:

made stuff in class intro more generic

source/modules/Class_introduction.rst, after:

.. _class_introduction:

#############
Introductions
#############

In which you are introduced to this class, your instructors, your environment and your new best friend, Python.


.. image:: /_static/python.png
    :align: center
    :width: 38%


`xkcd.com/353`_

.. _xkcd.com/353: http://xkcd.com/353


Who are we?
-----------


Who are you?
------------


  Tell us a tiny bit about yourself:

* name
* programming background: what languages have you used?
* neighbor's name
* neighbor's favorite coffee shop or bar


Introduction to This Class
==========================


  Introduction to Python

A link to the syllabus, schedule, supplemental materials and other resources should have been sent to you.

Class Structure
---------------

We will be using a variation of a
`"flipped classroom" <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flipped_classroom>`_
for this program.

This means that the "homework" will be reading, watching videos, etc.

And class time will spent primarly coding:

 * Still some lecture -- as little as possible
 * Lots of demos
 * Working on Coding Exercises:
   - On your own, with us to help
   - In small groups
   - Instructor led.

Interrupt with questions -- please!

(Some of the best learning prompted by questions)

Homework:
---------

* Homework will primarily be reading, and the occasional Video

* Exercises will be started in class -- but you can finish them at home.

* You are adults -- it's up to you to do it

* You can do a gitHub "pull request" if you want us to review your work.

    - We'll show you how to do that today.

Communication
-------------

**Mailing list:**

You should have been subscribed to the mailing list, if not talk to your instructors.

We will be using this list to communicate with you. You should have (or will soon) received an email invitation to join the mailing list.

Slack: We have set up a slack channel for discussions. Anything python related is fair game (or not in the random channel). Again, if you did not receive and invite to slack, talk to your instructors.


We highly encourage you to work together. You will learn at a much deeper level if you work together, and it gets you ready to collaborate with colleagues. If you have never used slack before, you may want to look at their intro:

https://get.slack.help/hc/en-us/articles/115004071768

Office Hours
------------

We will generally will hold "office hours" at a coffee shop for a couple hours each weekend.

Please feel free to attend even if you do not have a specific question. It is an opportunity to work with the instructors and fellow students, and learn from each other.

What are good times for you?

And what locations?
