source/modules/Comprehensions.rst, before:

.. _comprehensions:

##############
Comprehensions
##############


List comprehensions
-------------------

A bit of functional programming

consider this common ``for`` loop structure:

.. code-block:: python

    new_list = []
    for variable in a_list:
        new_list.append(expression)

This can be expressed with a single line using a "list comprehension"

.. code-block:: python

    new_list = [expression for variable in a_list]


.. nextslide::

What about nested for loops?

.. code-block:: python

    new_list = []
    for var in a_list:
        for var2 in a_list2:
            new_list.append(expression)

Can also be expressed in one line:

.. code-block:: python

    new_list =  [exp for var in a_list for var2 in a_list2]

You get the "outer product", i.e. all combinations.

.. nextslide::

But usually you at least have a conditional in the loop:

.. code-block:: python

    new_list = []
    for variable in a_list:
        if something_is_true:
            new_list.append(expression)

You can add a conditional to the comprehension:

.. code-block:: python

    new_list = [expr for var in a_list if something_is_true]

.. nextslide::

Examples:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [341]: [x**2 for x in range(3)]
    Out[341]: [0, 1, 4]

    In [342]: [x+y for x in range(3) for y in range(5,7)]
    Out[342]: [5, 6, 6, 7, 7, 8]

    In [343]: [x*2 for x in range(6) if not x%2]
    Out[343]: [0, 4, 8]

.. nextslide::

Get creative....

.. code-block:: python

    [name for name in dir(__builtin__) if "Error" in name]
    ['ArithmeticError',
     'AssertionError',
     'AttributeError',
     'BufferError',
     'EOFError',
     ....

Set Comprehensions
------------------

You can do it with sets, too:

.. code-block:: python

    new_set = { value for variable in a_sequence }


same as for loop:

.. code-block:: python

    new_set = set()
    for key in a_list:
        new_set.add(value)


.. nextslide::

Example: finding all the vowels in a string...

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [19]: s = "a not very long string"

    In [20]: vowels = set('aeiou')

    In [21]: { l for l in s if l in vowels }
    Out[21]: {'a', 'e', 'i', 'o'}

Side note: why did I do ``set('aeiou')`` rather than just `aeiou` ?

Dict Comprehensions
-------------------

Also with dictionaries

.. code-block:: python

    new_dict = { key:value for variable in a_sequence}


same as for loop:

.. code-block:: python

    new_dict = {}
    for key in a_list:
        new_dict[key] = value



.. nextslide::

Example

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [22]: { i: "this_%i"%i for i in range(5) }
    Out[22]: {0: 'this_0', 1: 'this_1', 2: 'this_2',
              3: 'this_3', 4: 'this_4'}


(not as useful with the ``dict()``  constructor...)

Commit message:

upddating the comprehensions page, and some session pages

source/modules/Comprehensions.rst, after:

.. _comprehensions:

##############
Comprehensions
##############


List comprehensions
-------------------

A bit of functional programming.

The concept of "functional programming" is clearly defined in some contexts, but is also used in a less strict sense. Python is **not** a functional language in the strict sense, but it does support a number of functional paradigms.

In general, code is considered "Pythonic" that used functional paradigms where they are natural, but not when they have to be forced in.

We will cover functional programming concepts more clearly later in the program, but for now, we'll talk about the syntax for a common functional paradigm: applying an expression to all the members of a sequence to produce another sequence:

Consider this common ``for`` loop structure:

.. code-block:: python

    new_list = []
    for variable in a_list:
        new_list.append(expression(variable))

This is such a common pattern, that python added syntax to directly support it:

It can be expressed with a single line using a "list comprehension"

.. code-block:: python

    new_list = [expression for variable in a_list]

What about nested for loops?

.. code-block:: python

    new_list = []
    for var in a_list:
        for var2 in a_list2:
            new_list.append(expression)

Can also be expressed in one line:

.. code-block:: python

    new_list =  [exp for var in a_list for var2 in a_list2]

You get the "outer product", i.e. all combinations.

NOTE: Example here...

This pattern is another way of expressing the "map" pattern from functional programming.


But usually you at least have a conditional in the loop:

.. code-block:: python

    new_list = []
    for variable in a_list:
        if something_is_true:
            new_list.append(expression)

You can add a conditional to the comprehension:

.. code-block:: python

    new_list = [expr for var in a_list if something_is_true]

This is expressing the "filter" pattern. (and map at the same time)


Examples:

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [341]: [x**2 for x in range(3)]
    Out[341]: [0, 1, 4]

    In [342]: [x+y for x in range(3) for y in range(5,7)]
    Out[342]: [5, 6, 6, 7, 7, 8]

    In [343]: [x*2 for x in range(6) if not x%2]
    Out[343]: [0, 4, 8]

.. nextslide::

Get creative....

.. code-block:: python

    [name for name in dir(__builtin__) if "Error" in name]
    ['ArithmeticError',
     'AssertionError',
     'AttributeError',
     'BufferError',
     'EOFError',
     ....

Set Comprehensions
------------------

You can do it with sets, too:

.. code-block:: python

    new_set = { value for variable in a_sequence }


same as for loop:

.. code-block:: python

    new_set = set()
    for key in a_list:
        new_set.add(value)


.. nextslide::

Example: finding all the vowels in a string...

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [19]: s = "a not very long string"

    In [20]: vowels = set('aeiou')

    In [21]: { l for l in s if l in vowels }
    Out[21]: {'a', 'e', 'i', 'o'}

Side note: why did I do ``set('aeiou')`` rather than just `aeiou` ?

Dict Comprehensions
-------------------

Also with dictionaries

.. code-block:: python

    new_dict = { key:value for variable in a_sequence}


same as for loop:

.. code-block:: python

    new_dict = {}
    for key in a_list:
        new_dict[key] = value



.. nextslide::

Example

.. code-block:: ipython

    In [22]: { i: "this_%i"%i for i in range(5) }
    Out[22]: {0: 'this_0', 1: 'this_1', 2: 'this_2',
              3: 'this_3', 4: 'this_4'}


(not as useful with the ``dict()``  constructor...)
