source/lesson_templates/course1_lesson01.rst, before:

:orphan:

.. _course1_lesson01:

Course Intro:
=============

[Paragraph introducing lesson to students]

Learning to program, whether in Python or in any other language, is about more than lerning the fundamentals of the language. Learning to program also involves learning the tools involved. You might liken it to carpentry. Without an adequatly provisioned workshop, without tools appropriate for the job, a carpenter wouldn't get very far.

Under ideal circumstances learning to program also involves learning to collaboate with others on code development. Working with other programmers is one of the best ways to improve as a programmer. The tools involved in collaboration are also a part of a programmers's workshop.

In this lesson we are looking to provision your workshop. We are going to set up an environment that will faciliate the collaborative creattion of Python code. We are also going to introuduce you to Python itself.

.. Fragments below:

.. Along the way you will find recommendations and suggestions, in some cases different approaches toward the same goal. We fully expect that as you mature as a programmer, and gain experience with different tools, you will choose certain tools over others, just as an experienced carpenter will develop a taste for specific tools for specific jobs over others. Before we get ahead of ourselves however, let's

.. And of course learning to program means understanding the fundamentals of the language itself.

.. Moreover an experienced carpenter is going to be more pikcy about their tools than an amateur, insisting on the right tool at the right time.

Learning objectives
-------------------

After completing this lesson, students will:

 1. Have functional Python development environments appropriate for their operating system of choice.
 2. Be able to minimally navigate a command line.
 3. Have a working installation of git for source code collaboration and control.
 4. Enjoy an introduction to the Python programming language as component in the practice of developing software.:w

Readings
---------

https://uwpce-pythoncert.github.io/PythonCertDevel/class_schedule/session_1_01.html

Self Produced
.............

External Readings
.................


screencasts/videos
------------------

 (~1-3 videos per lesson, 1 topic per video)

Titles and links to scripts

https://github.com/UWPCE-PythonCert/PythonCertDevel/blob/master/source/scripts/Intro.txt

Graded Assignments
------------------

(title and details)

Quizzes/exams
-------------

(graded or ungraded)

Other activities
----------------

[Title, instructions]

Special notes/ instructions
---------------------------

Commit message:

Nothing gradable for first class

source/lesson_templates/course1_lesson01.rst, after:

:orphan:

.. _course1_lesson01:

Course Intro:
=============

[Paragraph introducing lesson to students]

Learning to program, whether in Python or in any other language, is about more than lerning the fundamentals of the language. Learning to program also involves learning the tools involved. You might liken it to carpentry. Without an adequatly provisioned workshop, without tools appropriate for the job, a carpenter wouldn't get very far.

Under ideal circumstances learning to program also involves learning to collaboate with others on code development. Working with other programmers is one of the best ways to improve as a programmer. The tools involved in collaboration are also a part of a programmers's workshop.

In this lesson we are looking to provision your workshop. We are going to set up an environment that will faciliate the collaborative creattion of Python code. We are also going to introuduce you to Python itself.

.. Fragments below:

.. Along the way you will find recommendations and suggestions, in some cases different approaches toward the same goal. We fully expect that as you mature as a programmer, and gain experience with different tools, you will choose certain tools over others, just as an experienced carpenter will develop a taste for specific tools for specific jobs over others. Before we get ahead of ourselves however, let's

.. And of course learning to program means understanding the fundamentals of the language itself.

.. Moreover an experienced carpenter is going to be more pikcy about their tools than an amateur, insisting on the right tool at the right time.

Learning objectives
-------------------

After completing this lesson, students will:

 1. Have functional Python development environments appropriate for their operating system of choice.
 2. Be able to minimally navigate a command line.
 3. Have a working installation of git for source code collaboration and control.
 4. Enjoy an introduction to the Python programming language as component in the practice of developing software.:w

Readings
---------

https://uwpce-pythoncert.github.io/PythonCertDevel/class_schedule/session_1_01.html

Self Produced
.............

External Readings
.................


screencasts/videos
------------------

 (~1-3 videos per lesson, 1 topic per video)

Titles and links to scripts

https://github.com/UWPCE-PythonCert/PythonCertDevel/blob/master/source/scripts/Intro.txt

Graded Assignments
------------------

There is nothing gradable for this class. Our primary objective is to get them set up so that they are ready to start coding for the rest of the program.

Quizzes/exams
-------------

(graded or ungraded)

Other activities
----------------

[Title, instructions]

Special notes/ instructions
---------------------------
