source/lesson_templates/course1_lesson02.rst, before:

:orphan:

.. _course1_lesson02:

Basic Python and Functions
==========================

In this lesson, we introduce enough Python to get some real work done. You will be able work with variables, the basic Python data types (numbers, and strings), do basic logic, and write functions to create modular code.

Learning objectives
-------------------

After completing this lesson, students will:

(Need to fill these in!)

 1. Write basic python functions
 2.

Readings
---------

Tutorials come in many forms, but I define a python "tutorial" as a quick high-level introduction, designed to kick start your python programming. It should give you enough to get something done, but not provide a lot of detailed explanations.  If you have been doing a bit of python coding already, or have taken an introductory programing class with Python, then you may be able to skip this step.

Every one of you has a different background and learning style. So take a bit of time to figure out which resource works for you.

https://uwpce-pythoncert.github.io/PythonCertDevel/references/learning.html

Provides some options. Do look it over.

Supplemental Reading:
---------------------

If you are comfortable with the materials in a tutorial, it's time for some more in-depth discussion. Here are a few options to get you started:

.. :ref:`basic_python_syntax`

https://uwpce-pythoncert.github.io/PythonCertDevel/modules/BasicPython.html#basic-python-syntax

.. :ref:`more_on_functions`

https://uwpce-pythoncert.github.io/PythonCertDevel/modules/Functions.html#more-on-functions

.. :ref:`documentation`

https://uwpce-pythoncert.github.io/PythonCertDevel/modules/Documentation.html#documentation


Supplemental Readings
.....................

If that is too fast, then here are some good options for another look:

*Think Python:* Chapters 1–6 (http://greenteapress.com/thinkpython2/html/index.html)

*Dive Into Python:* Chapters 1–2 (http://www.diveintopython3.net/)

*LPTHW:* ex. 1–10, 18-21 (https://learnpythonthehardway.org/python3/)

(note: LPTHW used to be totally free --now it looks like you may only get a sneak peak -- darn! -- but the first few "chapters" are available)

Learning a bit about git:

We are only using a small subset of git functionality for this class,
but if you feel lost, and/or want to know more, these are some good resources:

http://rogerdudler.github.io/git-guide/

or

https://try.github.io/

screencasts/videos
------------------

 (~1-3 videos per lesson, 1 topic per video)


Graded Assignments
------------------

.. :ref:`exercise_grid_printer`

https://uwpce-pythoncert.github.io/PythonCertDevel/exercises/grid_printer.html#exercise-grid-printer

.. :ref:`exercise_fizz_buzz`

https://uwpce-pythoncert.github.io/PythonCertDevel/exercises/fizz_buzz.html#exercise-fizz-buzz

.. :ref:`exercise_fibonacci`

https://uwpce-pythoncert.github.io/PythonCertDevel/exercises/fib_and_lucas.html#exercise-fibonacci

Quizzes/exams
-------------

None

Other activities
----------------

None

Special notes/ instructions
---------------------------

None

Commit message:

Added objectives.Made a couple of wording changes
May revisit all the content later

source/lesson_templates/course1_lesson02.rst, after:

:orphan:

.. _course1_lesson02:

Basic Python and Functions
==========================

In this lesson, we introduce enough Python to get some real work done. You will be able work with variables, the basic Python data types (numbers, and strings), do basic logic, and write functions to create modular code.

Learning objectives
-------------------

After completing this lesson, students will:

 1. Be able to develop and run a simple Python program using their preferred editor, so that they are fully familiar with the associated techniques.
 2. Know how to name, create and use variables in a Python program, so that they have a foundation of this knowledge on which to build for later learning and assignments.
 3. Use and demonstrate Python constructs to control program flow, so that various types of conditional logic are understood and applied.
 4. Write basic Python functions and show how they are used in simple scenarios, so that they can demonstrate and understand how to start to avoid redundancies in code. 

Readings
---------

Tutorials come in many forms, but I define a Python "tutorial" as a quick high-level introduction, designed to kick start your Python programming. It should give you enough to get something done, but not provide a lot of detailed explanations.  If you have been doing a bit of Python coding already, or have taken an introductory programing class with Python, then you may be able to skip this step.

Every one of you has a different background and learning style. So take whatever time you need to figure out which resource works for you.

https://uwpce-pythoncert.github.io/PythonCertDevel/references/learning.html

Provides some options. Do look it over.

Supplemental Reading:
---------------------

If you are comfortable with the materials in a tutorial, it's time for some more in-depth discussion. Here are a few options to get you started:

.. :ref:`basic_python_syntax`

https://uwpce-pythoncert.github.io/PythonCertDevel/modules/BasicPython.html#basic-python-syntax

.. :ref:`more_on_functions`

https://uwpce-pythoncert.github.io/PythonCertDevel/modules/Functions.html#more-on-functions

.. :ref:`documentation`

https://uwpce-pythoncert.github.io/PythonCertDevel/modules/Documentation.html#documentation


Supplemental Readings
.....................

If that is too fast, then here are some good options for another look:

*Think Python:* Chapters 1–6 (http://greenteapress.com/thinkpython2/html/index.html)

*Dive Into Python:* Chapters 1–2 (http://www.diveintopython3.net/)

*LPTHW:* ex. 1–10, 18-21 (https://learnpythonthehardway.org/python3/)

(note: LPTHW used to be totally free --now it looks like you may only get a sneak peak -- darn! -- but the first few "chapters" are available)

Learning a bit about git:

We are only using a small subset of git functionality for this class,
but if you feel lost, and/or want to know more, these are some good resources:

http://rogerdudler.github.io/git-guide/

or

https://try.github.io/

screencasts/videos
------------------

 (~1-3 videos per lesson, 1 topic per video)


Graded Assignments
------------------

.. :ref:`exercise_grid_printer`

https://uwpce-pythoncert.github.io/PythonCertDevel/exercises/grid_printer.html#exercise-grid-printer

.. :ref:`exercise_fizz_buzz`

https://uwpce-pythoncert.github.io/PythonCertDevel/exercises/fizz_buzz.html#exercise-fizz-buzz

.. :ref:`exercise_fibonacci`

https://uwpce-pythoncert.github.io/PythonCertDevel/exercises/fib_and_lucas.html#exercise-fibonacci

Quizzes/exams
-------------

None

Other activities
----------------

None

Special notes/ instructions
---------------------------

None
