source/exercises/file_lab.rst, before:

.. _exercise_file_lab:

********
File LAB
********

A bit of practice with files
============================

Goal:
-----

Get a little bit of practice with handling files and parsing simple text.


Paths and File Processing
--------------------------

* Write a program which prints the full path for all files in the current
  directory, one per line

* Write a program which copies a file from a source, to a destination
  (without using shutil, or the OS copy command).

  - Advanced: make it work for any size file: i.e. don't read the entire
    contents of the file into memory at once.

  - This should work for any kind of file, so you need to open
    the files in binary mode: ``open(filename, 'rb')`` (or ``'wb'`` for
    writing). Note that for binary files, you can't use ``readline()`` --
    lines don't have any meaning for binary files.

  - Test it with both text and binary files (maybe jpeg or something of oyur chosing).


File reading and parsing
------------------------

In the class repo, in:

``Examples/Session01/students.txt``

you will find the list we generated in the first class of all the students in the class, and what programming languages they have used in the past.

Write a little script that reads that file, and generates a list of all
the languages that have been used.

Extra credit: keep track of how many students specified each language.

If you've got git set up right, ``git pull upstream master`` should update
your repo. Otherwise, you can get it from gitHub:

https://raw.githubusercontent.com/UWPCE-PythonCert/IntroPython-2017/master/examples/Session01/students.txt

Commit message:

added solutions to the file exercise

source/exercises/file_lab.rst, after:

.. _exercise_file_lab:

#############
File Exercise
#############

A bit of practice with files

Goal:
=====

Get a little bit of practice with handling files and parsing simple text.


Paths and File Processing
=========================

* Write a program which prints the full path for all files in the current
  directory, one per line

* Write a program which copies a file from a source, to a destination
  (without using shutil, or the OS copy command).

  - Advanced: make it work for any size file: i.e. don't read the entire
    contents of the file into memory at once.

  - This should work for any kind of file, so you need to open
    the files in binary mode: ``open(filename, 'rb')`` (or ``'wb'`` for
    writing). Note that for binary files, you can't use ``readline()`` --
    lines don't have any meaning for binary files.

  - Test it with both text and binary files (maybe jpeg or something of your choosing).


File reading and parsing
========================

Download this text file:

:download:`students.txt <../examples/file_exercise/students.txt>`

In it, you will find a list of names and what programming languages they have used in the past. This may be similar to a list generated at the beginning of this class.

Write a little script that reads that file, and generates a list of all the languages that have been used.

What might be the best data structure to use to keep track of bunch of values without duplication?

The file format:
----------------

The first line of the file is:

``Name: Nickname, languages``

And each line looks something like this:

``Jagger, Michael: Mick, shell, python``

So a colon after the name, then the nickname, and then one or more languages.

However, like real data files, the file is NOT well-formed. Only some lines have nicknames, and other small differences, so you will need to write some code to make sure you get it all correct.

Extra challenge: keep track of how many students specified each language.
