source/references/learning.rst, before:

.. _python_learning_resources:

================================
Useful Python Learning Resources
================================

In addition to the material we cover in class, there are numerous online
resources to help a newcomer get to know Python. The following list represents
the best-known and best-regarded of the breed. If you are itching for a bit
more work on your Python chops, you should try these out.

Python Language Resources
==========================

As a Python programmer, you'll want to keep a bookmark pointed at the
official Python documentation (https://docs.python.org/3/), especially
the documentation for the standard library
(https://docs.python.org/3/library/index.html). However, there are a
number of additional resources you can (and should) use to help build
your Python chops.

For the beginner
-----------------

Getting started tutorials
.........................

* **Jessica McKeller's begining tutorial** (Video)
  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MirG-vJOg04

* **The Python Tutorial**
  (https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/): This is the
  official tutorial from the Python website. No more authoritative source is
  available.

* **Code Academy Python Track**
  (http://www.codecademy.com/tracks/python): Often
  cited as a great resource, this site offers an entertaining and engaging
  approach and in-browser work.

* **Learn Python the Hard Way**
  (https://learnpythonthehardway.org/python3/): Solid
  and gradual. This course offers a great foundation for folks who have never
  programmed in any language before.


Complete Books / Series
.......................

* **Dive Into Python 3**
  (http://www.diveintopython3.net/): The updated version
  of a classic. This book offers an introduction to Python aimed at the student
  who has experience programming in another language.

* **Python for You and Me**
  (http://pymbook.readthedocs.org/en/latest/): Simple
  and clear. This is a great book for absolute newcomers, or to keep as a quick
  reference as you get used to the language.

* **Think Python**
  (http://greenteapress.com/thinkpython2/html/index.html): Methodical and
  complete.  This book offers a very "computer science-style" introduction to
  Python. It is really an intro to Python *in the service of* Computer Science,
  though, so while helpful for the absolute newcomer, it isn't quite as
  "pythonic" as it might be.

* **Core Python Programming**
  (http://corepython.com/): Only available as a dead trees version, but
  if you like to have book to hold in your hands anyway, this
  is the best textbook style introduction out there. It starts from the
  beginning, but gets into the full language. Published in 2009, but still in
  print, with updated appendixes available for new language features.

* **Python 101**
  (http://www.blog.pythonlibrary.org/2014/06/03/python-101-book-published-today/)
  Available as a reasonably priced ebook. This is a new one from a popular blogger
  about Python. Lots of practical examples. Also available as a Kindle book:
  http://www.amazon.com/Python-101-Michael-Driscoll-ebook/dp/B00KQTFHNK

Python Tutor
............

Python Tutor is a really nifty site that lets you write and run Python code, and visualize what is going on as it runs. Really gives you idea what is going on under the hood, with the stack, etc.

http://pythontutor.com/


Next Steps
----------

Web sites / services:
.....................

* **New Coder**
  (http://newcoder.io): advertised as "Five lifejackets to throw to
  the new coder", this site offers five very interesting tutorials written in
  an engaging style. Not an introduction. More a second step.

* **OpenHatch**
  (https://openhatch.org/wiki/Intermediate_Python_Workshop/Projects):
  The Open Hatch project offers a number of workshops with well-paced
  intermediate tutorials for Python programming. A great place to go once you
  have the basics down and are ready for more challenging work.

Advanced Books
..............

* **The Python Cookbook**
  (http://chimera.labs.oreilly.com/books/1230000000393):
  The Python Cookbook provides practical solutions to various programming tasks, along with excellent explanations of how they work. Written by David Beazley -- Python author and instructor extraordinaire. Also available fully online: (http://chimera.labs.oreilly.com/books/1230000000393/index.html)


Evaluating Your Options
-----------------------------

The blurbs above are short descriptions of the material in each resource. We've
drawn them both from our own usage of the various tools, and from a wonderful
set of online reviews:

(http://planningadinner.blogspot.com/search/label/So%20you%20want%20to%20learn%20Python.%20What%27s%20next%3F)

done by Marta Maria Casetti on her blog, "Planning a Dinner"
(http://planningadinner.blogspot.com/).

The poster she presented at PyCon 2014
(http://planningadinner.blogspot.com/2014/04/the-poster.html)
as a result of that research offers some great hints about the aspects of
Python programming best covered by each resource. I would urge any new student
of Python to take the time to look over this poster to help determine the best
path forward for themselves.

Commit message:

cleaned out extra fizzbuzz soltuions. updated learning for Dive Into Python no longer online :-(

source/references/learning.rst, after:

.. _python_learning_resources:

================================
Useful Python Learning Resources
================================

In addition to the material we cover in class, there are numerous online
resources to help a newcomer get to know Python. The following list represents
the best-known and best-regarded of the breed. If you are itching for a bit
more work on your Python chops, you should try these out.

Python Language Resources
==========================

As a Python programmer, you'll want to keep a bookmark pointed at the
official Python documentation (https://docs.python.org/3/), especially
the documentation for the standard library
(https://docs.python.org/3/library/index.html). However, there are a
number of additional resources you can (and should) use to help build
your Python chops.

For the beginner
-----------------

Getting started tutorials
.........................

* **Jessica McKeller's begining tutorial** (Video)
  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MirG-vJOg04

* **The Python Tutorial**
  (https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/): This is the
  official tutorial from the Python website. No more authoritative source is
  available.

* **Code Academy Python Track**
  (http://www.codecademy.com/tracks/python): Often
  cited as a great resource, this site offers an entertaining and engaging
  approach and in-browser work.

* **Learn Python the Hard Way**
  (https://learnpythonthehardway.org/python3/): Solid
  and gradual. This course offers a great foundation for folks who have never
  programmed in any language before.


Complete Books / Series
.......................

* **Dive Into Python 3**
  (https://www.apress.com/us/book/9781430224150): The updated version
  of a classic. This book offers an introduction to Python aimed at the student
  who has experience programming in another language.  It used to be available free online -- you can still find PDF copies on the web.

* **Python for You and Me**
  (http://pymbook.readthedocs.org/en/latest/): Simple
  and clear. This is a great book for absolute newcomers, or to keep as a quick
  reference as you get used to the language.

* **Think Python**
  (http://greenteapress.com/thinkpython2/html/index.html): Methodical and
  complete.  This book offers a very "computer science-style" introduction to
  Python. It is really an intro to Python *in the service of* Computer Science,
  though, so while helpful for the absolute newcomer, it isn't quite as
  "pythonic" as it might be.

* **Core Python Programming**
  (http://corepython.com/): Only available as a dead trees version, but
  if you like to have book to hold in your hands anyway, this
  is the best textbook style introduction out there. It starts from the
  beginning, but gets into the full language. Published in 2009, but still in
  print, with updated appendixes available for new language features.

* **Python 101**
  (https://leanpub.com/python_101)
  Available as a reasonably priced ebook. This is a new one from a popular blogger
  about Python. Lots of practical examples. Also available as a Kindle book:
  http://www.amazon.com/Python-101-Michael-Driscoll-ebook/dp/B00KQTFHNK

Python Tutor
............

Python Tutor is a really nifty site that lets you write and run Python code, and visualize what is going on as it runs. Really gives you idea what is going on under the hood, with the stack, etc.

http://pythontutor.com/


Next Steps
----------

Web sites / services:
.....................

* **New Coder**
  (http://newcoder.io): advertised as "Five lifejackets to throw to
  the new coder", this site offers five very interesting tutorials written in
  an engaging style. Not an introduction. More a second step.

* **OpenHatch**
  (https://openhatch.org/wiki/Intermediate_Python_Workshop/Projects):
  The Open Hatch project offers a number of workshops with well-paced
  intermediate tutorials for Python programming. A great place to go once you
  have the basics down and are ready for more challenging work.

Advanced Books
..............

* **The Python Cookbook**
  (http://chimera.labs.oreilly.com/books/1230000000393):
  The Python Cookbook provides practical solutions to various programming tasks, along with excellent explanations of how they work. Written by David Beazley -- Python author and instructor extraordinaire. Also available fully online: (http://chimera.labs.oreilly.com/books/1230000000393/index.html)


Evaluating Your Options
-----------------------------

The blurbs above are short descriptions of the material in each resource. We've
drawn them both from our own usage of the various tools, and from a wonderful
set of online reviews:

(http://planningadinner.blogspot.com/search/label/So%20you%20want%20to%20learn%20Python.%20What%27s%20next%3F)

done by Marta Maria Casetti on her blog, "Planning a Dinner"
(http://planningadinner.blogspot.com/).

The poster she presented at PyCon 2014
(http://planningadinner.blogspot.com/2014/04/the-poster.html)
as a result of that research offers some great hints about the aspects of
Python programming best covered by each resource. I would urge any new student
of Python to take the time to look over this poster to help determine the best
path forward for themselves.
